---
layout: post
title:  "Wikiji: EDA"
author: Nate Lewis
description: How frequent are various Kanji on Wikipedia?
image: /assets/images/jp_landscape.jpg
---

<h2>Introduction</h2>

Where does a Japanese learner begin when facing the daunting challenge of learning thousands of kanji? This is the question that motivated me to do this project and the one I hope to help answer in this blog post. Hopefully by looking at my compiled data concerning kanji frequencies from Wikipedia in conjunction with other sources, the answer to this question will be slightly clearer.

Of course the question of frequency of kanji is not a new one, but I think the approach to defining frequnecy is often flawed. Most dictionaries (such as the very popular [jisho.org](https://jisho.org/search/%E9%96%A3%20%23kanji)) will define the frequnecy of kanji based on how often they appear in Japanese newspapers. This isn't necessarily a bad way to define frequency, but for learners it can also be misleading as to how essential some kanji are. For example the kanji 閣 is rated as the 444th most common kanji in newspapers. This would indicate that its frequency is around what a late beginner/early intermediate learner should be looking at. This kanji, however, has essentially only one word it is used in which means cabinet as in the presidential cabinet. While this word is certainly worth knowing, I don't think anyone would argue this character should be a higher priority for learners than 母 (mother) which is ranked as the 570th kanji in newspapers. Other less common but still existent methods of ranking kanji frequency sush as frequency in manga or frequency in novels have similar issues with niche language being overrated. Looking at Wikipedia instead of newspapers or manga does not eliminate the overrating of niche kanji, but by seeing a ranking of frequency in multiple types of sources side by side learners get a more complete view of what is essential and what can be saved for later.

<h2>How do Frequencies Differ Across Sources?</h2>

